An attempt has been made in these pages to trace the evolution of
intellectual thought in the progress of astronomical discovery, and, by
recognising the different points of view of the different ages, to give
due credit even to the ancients. No one can expect, in a history of
astronomy of limited size, to find a treatise on “practical” or on
“theoretical astronomy,” nor a complete “descriptive astronomy,” and
still less a book on “speculative astronomy.” Something of each of
these is essential, however, for tracing the progress of thought and
knowledge which it is the object of this History to describe.

The progress of human knowledge is measured by the increased habit of
looking at facts from new points of view, as much as by the
accumulation of facts. The mental capacity of one age does not seem to
differ from that of other ages; but it is the imagination of new points
of view that gives a wider scope to that capacity. And this is
cumulative, and therefore progressive. Aristotle viewed the solar
system as a geometrical problem; Kepler and Newton converted the point
of view into a dynamical one. Aristotle’s mental capacity to understand
the meaning of facts or to criticise a train of reasoning may have been
equal to that of Kepler or Newton, but the point of view was different.

Then, again, new points of view are provided by the invention of new
methods in that system of logic which we call mathematics. All that
mathematics can do is to assure us that a statement A is equivalent to
statements B, C, D, or is one of the facts expressed by the statements
B, C, D; so that we may know, if B, C, and D are true, then A is true.
To many people our inability to understand all that is contained in
statements B, C, and D, without the cumbrous process of a mathematical
demonstration, proves the feebleness of the human mind as a logical
machine. For it required the new point of view imagined by Newton’s
analysis to enable people to see that, so far as planetary orbits are
concerned, Kepler’s three laws (B, C, D) were identical with Newton’s
law of gravitation (A). No one recognises more than the mathematical
astronomer this feebleness of the human intellect, and no one is more
conscious of the limitations of the logical process called mathematics,
which even now has not solved directly the problem of only three
bodies.

These reflections, arising from the writing of this History, go to
explain the invariable humility of the great mathematical astronomers.
Newton’s comparison of himself to the child on the seashore applies to
them all. As each new discovery opens up, it may be, boundless oceans
for investigation, for wonder, and for admiration, the great
astronomers, refusing to accept mere hypotheses as true, have founded
upon these discoveries a science as exact in its observation of facts
as in theories. So it is that these men, who have built up the most
sure and most solid of all the sciences, refuse to invite others to
join them in vain speculation. The writer has, therefore, in this short
History, tried to follow that great master, Airy, whose pupil he was,
and the key to whose character was exactness and accuracy; and he
recognises that Science is impotent except in her own limited sphere.

It has been necessary to curtail many parts of the History in the
attempt—perhaps a hopeless one—to lay before the reader in a limited
space enough about each age to illustrate its tone and spirit, the
ideals of the workers, the gradual addition of new points of view and
of new means of investigation.

It would, indeed, be a pleasure to entertain the hope that these pages
might, among new recruits, arouse an interest in the greatest of all
the sciences, or that those who have handled the theoretical or
practical side might be led by them to read in the original some of the
classics of astronomy. Many students have much compassion for the
schoolboy of to-day, who is not allowed the luxury of learning the art
of reasoning from him who still remains pre-eminently its greatest
exponent, Euclid. These students pity also the man of to-morrow, who is
not to be allowed to read, in the original Latin of the brilliant
Kepler, how he was able—by observations taken from a moving platform,
the earth, of the directions of a moving object, Mars—to deduce the
exact shape of the path of each of these planets, and their actual
positions on these paths at any time. Kepler’s masterpiece is one of
the most interesting books that was ever written, combining wit,
imagination, ingenuity, and certainty.

Lastly, it must be noted that, as a History of England cannot deal with
the present Parliament, so also the unfinished researches and untested
hypotheses of many well-known astronomers of to-day cannot be included
among the records of the History of Astronomy. The writer regrets the
necessity that thus arises of leaving without mention the names of many
who are now making history in astronomical work.

G. F.

_August_ 1_st_, 1909.




BOOK I. THE GEOMETRICAL PERIOD

1. PRIMITIVE ASTRONOMY AND ASTROLOGY.


The growth of intelligence in the human race has its counterpart in
that of the individual, especially in the earliest stages. Intellectual
activity and the development of reasoning powers are in both cases
based upon the accumulation of experiences, and on the comparison,
classification, arrangement, and nomenclature of these experiences.
During the infancy of each the succession of events can be watched, but
there can be no _à priori_ anticipations. Experience alone, in both
cases, leads to the idea of cause and effect as a principle that seems
to dominate our present universe, as a rule for predicting the course
of events, and as a guide to the choice of a course of action. This
idea of cause and effect is the most potent factor in developing the
history of the human race, as of the individual.

In no realm of nature is the principle of cause and effect more
conspicuous than in astronomy; and we fall into the habit of thinking
of its laws as not only being unchangeable in our universe, but
necessary to the conception of any universe that might have been
substituted in its place. The first inhabitants of the world were
compelled to accommodate their acts to the daily and annual
alternations of light and darkness and of heat and cold, as much as to
the irregular changes of weather, attacks of disease, and the fortune
of war. They soon came to regard the influence of the sun, in
connection with light and heat, as a cause. This led to a search for
other signs in the heavens. If the appearance of a comet was sometimes
noted simultaneously with the death of a great ruler, or an eclipse
with a scourge of plague, these might well be looked upon as causes in
the same sense that the veering or backing of the wind is regarded as a
cause of fine or foul weather.

For these reasons we find that the earnest men of all ages have
recorded the occurrence of comets, eclipses, new stars, meteor showers,
and remarkable conjunctions of the planets, as well as plagues and
famines, floods and droughts, wars and the deaths of great rulers.
Sometimes they thought they could trace connections which might lead
them to say that a comet presaged famine, or an eclipse war.

Even if these men were sometimes led to evolve laws of cause and effect
which now seem to us absurd, let us be tolerant, and gratefully
acknowledge that these astrologers, when they suggested such “working
hypotheses,” were laying the foundations of observation and deduction.

If the ancient Chaldæans gave to the planetary conjunctions an
influence over terrestrial events, let us remember that in our own time
people have searched for connection between terrestrial conditions and
periods of unusual prevalence of sun spots; while De la Rue, Loewy, and
Balfour Stewart[1] thought they found a connection between sun-spot
displays and the planetary positions. Thus we find scientific men, even
in our own time, responsible for the belief that storms in the Indian
Ocean, the fertility of German vines, famines in India, and high or low
Nile-floods in Egypt follow the planetary positions.

And, again, the desire to foretell the weather is so laudable that we
cannot blame the ancient Greeks for announcing the influence of the
moon with as much confidence as it is affirmed in Lord Wolseley’s
_Soldier’s Pocket Book_.

Even if the scientific spirit of observation and deduction (astronomy)
has sometimes led to erroneous systems for predicting terrestrial
events (astrology), we owe to the old astronomer and astrologer alike
the deepest gratitude for their diligence in recording astronomical
events. For, out of the scanty records which have survived the
destructive acts of fire and flood, of monarchs and mobs, we have found
much that has helped to a fuller knowledge of the heavenly motions than
was possible without these records.

So Hipparchus, about 150 B.C., and Ptolemy a little later, were able to
use the observations of Chaldæan astrologers, as well as those of
Alexandrian astronomers, and to make some discoveries which have helped
the progress of astronomy in all ages. So, also, Mr. Cowell[2] has
examined the marks made on the baked bricks used by the Chaldæans for
recording the eclipses of 1062 B.C. and 762 B.C.; and has thereby been
enabled, in the last few years, to correct the lunar tables of Hansen,
and to find a more accurate value for the secular acceleration of the
moon’s longitude and the node of her orbit than any that could be
obtained from modern observations made with instruments of the highest
precision.

So again, Mr. Hind[3] was enabled to trace back the period during which
Halley’s comet has been a member of the solar system, and to identify
it in the Chinese observations of comets as far back as 12 B.C. Cowell
and Cromellin extended the date to 240 B.C. In the same way the comet
1861.i. has been traced back in the Chinese records to 617 A.D.[4]

The theoretical views founded on Newton’s great law of universal
gravitation led to the conclusion that the inclination of the earth’s
equator to the plane of her orbit (the obliquity of the ecliptic) has
been diminishing slowly since prehistoric times; and this fact has been
confirmed by Egyptian and Chinese observations on the length of the
shadow of a vertical pillar, made thousands of years before the
Christian era, in summer and winter.

There are other reasons why we must be tolerant of the crude notions of
the ancients. The historian, wishing to give credit wherever it may be
due, is met by two difficulties. Firstly, only a few records of very
ancient astronomy are extant, and the authenticity of many of these is
open to doubt. Secondly, it is very difficult to divest ourselves of
present knowledge, and to appreciate the originality of thought
required to make the first beginnings.

With regard to the first point, we are generally dependent upon
histories written long after the events. The astronomy of Egyptians,
Babylonians, and Assyrians is known to us mainly through the Greek
historians, and for information about the Chinese we rely upon the
researches of travellers and missionaries in comparatively recent
times. The testimony of the Greek writers has fortunately been
confirmed, and we now have in addition a mass of facts translated from
the original sculptures, papyri, and inscribed bricks, dating back
thousands of years.

In attempting to appraise the efforts of the beginners we must remember
that it was natural to look upon the earth (as all the first
astronomers did) as a circular plane, surrounded and bounded by the
heaven, which was a solid vault, or hemisphere, with its concavity
turned downwards. The stars seemed to be fixed on this vault; the moon,
and later the planets, were seen to crawl over it. It was a great step
to look on the vault as a hollow sphere carrying the sun too. It must
have been difficult to believe that at midday the stars are shining as
brightly in the blue sky as they do at night. It must have been
difficult to explain how the sun, having set in the west, could get
back to rise in the east without being seen _if_ it was always the same
sun. It was a great step to suppose the earth to be spherical, and to
ascribe the diurnal motions to its rotation. Probably the greatest step
ever made in astronomical theory was the placing of the sun, moon, and
planets at different distances from the earth instead of having them
stuck on the vault of heaven. It was a transition from “flatland” to a
space of three dimensions.

Great progress was made when systematic observations began, such as
following the motion of the moon and planets among the stars, and the
inferred motion of the sun among the stars, by observing their
_heliacal risings_—i.e., the times of year when a star would first be
seen to rise at sunrise, and when it could last be seen to rise at
sunset. The grouping of the stars into constellations and recording
their places was a useful observation. The theoretical prediction of
eclipses of the sun and moon, and of the motions of the planets among
the stars, became later the highest goal in astronomy.

To not one of the above important steps in the progress of astronomy
can we assign the author with certainty. Probably many of them were
independently taken by Chinese, Indian, Persian, Tartar, Egyptian,
Babylonian, Assyrian, Phoenician, and Greek astronomers. And we have
not a particle of information about the discoveries, which may have
been great, by other peoples—by the Druids, the Mexicans, and the
Peruvians, for example.

We do know this, that all nations required to have a calendar. The
solar year, the lunar month, and the day were the units, and it is
owing to their incommensurability that we find so many calendars
proposed and in use at different times. The only object to be attained
by comparing the chronologies of ancient races is to fix the actual
dates of observations recorded, and this is not a part of a history of
astronomy.

In conclusion, let us bear in mind the limited point of view of the
ancients when we try to estimate their merit. Let us remember that the
first astronomy was of two dimensions; the second astronomy was of
three dimensions, but still purely geometrical. Since Kepler’s day we
have had a dynamical astronomy.

FOOTNOTES:

 [1] Trans. R. S. E., xxiii. 1864, p. 499, _On Sun Spots_, _etc_., by
 B. Stewart. Also Trans. R. S. 1860-70. Also Prof. Ernest Brown, in _R.
 A. S. Monthly Notices_, 1900.

 [2] _R. A. S. Monthly Notices_, Sup.; 1905.

[Illustration: CHALDÆAN BAKED BRICK OR TABLET,
_Obverse and reverse sides_, Containing record of solar eclipse, 1062
B.C., used lately by Cowell for rendering the lunar theory more
accurate than was possible by finest modern observations. (British
Museum collection, No. 35908.)]

 [3] _R. A. S. Monthly Notices_, vol. x., p. 65.

 [4] R. S. E. Proc., vol. x., 1880.




2. ANCIENT ASTRONOMY—THE CHINESE AND CHALDÆANS.


The last section must have made clear the difficulties the way of
assigning to the ancient nations their proper place in the development
of primitive notions about astronomy. The fact that some alleged
observations date back to a period before the Chinese had invented the
art of writing leads immediately to the question how far tradition can
be trusted.

Our first detailed knowledge was gathered in the far East by
travellers, and by the Jesuit priests, and was published in the
eighteenth century. The Asiatic Society of Bengal contributed
translations of Brahmin literature. The two principal sources of
knowledge about Chinese astronomy were supplied, first by Father
Souciet, who in 1729 published _Observations Astronomical,
Geographical, Chronological, and Physical_, drawn from ancient Chinese
books; and later by Father Moyriac-de-Mailla, who in 1777-1785
published _Annals of the Chinese Empire, translated from
Tong-Kien-Kang-Mou_.

Bailly, in his _Astronomie Ancienne_ (1781), drew, from these and other
sources, the conclusion that all we know of the astronomical learning
of the Chinese, Indians, Chaldæans, Assyrians, and Egyptians is but the
remnant of a far more complete astronomy of which no trace can be
found.

Delambre, in his _Histoire de l’Astronomie Ancienne_ (1817), ridicules
the opinion of Bailly, and considers that the progress made by all of
these nations is insignificant.

It will be well now to give an idea of some of the astronomy of the
ancients not yet entirely discredited. China and Babylon may be taken
as typical examples.

_China_.—It would appear that Fohi, the first emperor, reigned about
2952 B.C., and shortly afterwards Yu-Chi made a sphere to represent the
motions of the celestial bodies. It is also mentioned, in the book
called Chu-King, supposed to have been written in 2205 B.C., that a
similar sphere was made in the time of Yao (2357 B.C.).[1] It is said
that the Emperor Chueni (2513 B.C.) saw five planets in conjunction the
same day that the sun and moon were in conjunction. This is discussed
by Father Martin (MSS. of De Lisle); also by M. Desvignolles (Mem.
Acad. Berlin, vol. iii., p. 193), and by M. Kirsch (ditto, vol. v., p.
19), who both found that Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, and Mercury were all
between the eleventh and eighteenth degrees of Pisces, all visible
together in the evening on February 28th 2446 B.C., while on the same
day the sun and moon were in conjunction at 9 a.m., and that on March
1st the moon was in conjunction with the other four planets. But this
needs confirmation.

Yao, referred to above, gave instructions to his astronomers to
determine the positions of the solstices and equinoxes, and they
reported the names of the stars in the places occupied by the sun at
these seasons, and in 2285 B.C. he gave them further orders. If this
account be true, it shows a knowledge that the vault of heaven is a
complete sphere, and that stars are shining at mid-day, although
eclipsed by the sun’s brightness.

It is also asserted, in the book called _Chu-King_, that in the time of
Yao the year was known to have 365¼ days, and that he adopted 365 days
and added an intercalary day every four years (as in the Julian
Calendar). This may be true or not, but the ancient Chinese certainly
seem to have divided the circle into 365 degrees. To learn the length
of the year needed only patient observation—a characteristic of the
Chinese; but many younger nations got into a terrible mess with their
calendar from ignorance of the year’s length.

It is stated that in 2159 B.C. the royal astronomers Hi and Ho failed
to predict an eclipse. It probably created great terror, for they were
executed in punishment for their neglect. If this account be true, it
means that in the twenty-second century B.C. some rule for calculating
eclipses was in use. Here, again, patient observation would easily lead
to the detection of the eighteen-year cycle known to the Chaldeans as
the _Saros_. It consists of 235 lunations, and in that time the pole of
the moon’s orbit revolves just once round the pole of the ecliptic, and
for this reason the eclipses in one cycle are repeated with very slight
modification in the next cycle, and so on for many centuries.

It may be that the neglect of their duties by Hi and Ho, and their
punishment, influenced Chinese astronomy; or that the succeeding
records have not been available to later scholars; but the fact remains
that—although at long intervals observations were made of eclipses,
comets, and falling stars, and of the position of the solstices, and of
the obliquity of the ecliptic—records become rare, until 776 B.C., when
eclipses began to be recorded once more with some approach to
continuity. Shortly afterwards notices of comets were added. Biot gave
a list of these, and Mr. John Williams, in 1871, published
_Observations of Comets from 611 B.C. to 1640 A.D., Extracted from the
Chinese Annals_.

With regard to those centuries concerning which we have no astronomical
Chinese records, it is fair to state that it is recorded that some
centuries before the Christian era, in the reign of Tsin-Chi-Hoang, all
the classical and scientific books that could be found were ordered to
be destroyed. If true, our loss therefrom is as great as from the
burning of the Alexandrian library by the Caliph Omar. He burnt all the
books because he held that they must be either consistent or
inconsistent with the Koran, and in the one case they were superfluous,
in the other case objectionable.
An attempt has been made in these pages to trace the evolution of

intellectual thought in the progress of astronomical discovery, and, by

recognising the different points of view of the different ages, to give

due credit even to the ancients. No one can expect, in a history of

astronomy of limited size, to find a treatise on “practical” or on

“theoretical astronomy,” nor a complete “descriptive astronomy,” and

still less a book on “speculative astronomy.” Something of each of

these is essential, however, for tracing the progress of thought and

knowledge which it is the object of this History to describe.



The progress of human knowledge is measured by the increased habit of

looking at facts from new points of view, as much as by the
